Just_Bash_It_Exercises.md, before:

![](BashFigure1.jpeg)
================
Center for Health Data Science, July 2022

-   [Introduction](#introduction)
-   [Exercise 1: Navigating Files and
    Directories](#exercise-1-navigating-files-and-directories)
-   [Exercise 2: Project Organization &
    Backup](#exercise-2-project-organization--backup)
-   [Exercise 3: Working with Files and
    Directories](#exercise-3-working-with-files-and-directories)
-   [Exercise 4: Commands, Redirection &
    Pipes](#exercise-4-commands-redirection--pipes)
-   [Exercise 5: Advanced Commands](#exercise-5-advanced-commands)
-   [Exercise 6: Editors and Shell
    scripts](#exercise-6-editors-and-shell-scripts)
-   [Exercise 7: Loops and Workflow
    Language](#exercise-7-loops-and-workflow-language)
-   [Exercise 8: Software Installation, Upkeep &
    More](#exercise-8-software-installation-upkeep--more)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Introduction

This markdown document contains of exercises for the introductory
workshop on command line use, entitled `Just Bash It`, developed and
hosted by Center for Health Data Science (HeaDS) at the Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences ([HeaDS](https://heads.ku.dk/)), in
collaboration with the University Library
([KUB](https://kub.kb.dk/datalab)) Data Lab.  
This one day workshop is intended for biomedical and health researchers
at the University of Copenhagen with no prior experience in bash command
line use.

The workshop consists of a slideshow with slides to each section, in
addition to hands-on presentations & exercises written in the markdown
language.

## Exercise 1: Navigating Files and Directories

``` bash
pwd
```

    ## /Users/kgx936/Desktop/HeaDS/GitHub_repos/Just-Bash-It

## Exercise 2: Project Organization & Backup

## Exercise 3: Working with Files and Directories

## Exercise 4: Commands, Redirection & Pipes

## Exercise 5: Advanced Commands

## Exercise 6: Editors and Shell scripts

## Exercise 7: Loops and Workflow Language

## Exercise 8: Software Installation, Upkeep & More

Commit message:

Working with files and directories parts added

Just_Bash_It_Exercises.md, after:

![](BashFigure1.jpeg)
================
Center for Health Data Science, July 2022

-   [Introduction](#introduction)
-   [Exercise 1: Navigating Files and
    Directories](#exercise-1-navigating-files-and-directories)
-   [Exercise 2: Project Organization](#exercise-2-project-organization)
-   [Exercise 3: Working with Files and
    Directories](#exercise-3-working-with-files-and-directories)
-   [Exercise 4: Commands, Redirection &
    Pipes](#exercise-4-commands-redirection--pipes)
-   [Exercise 5: Advanced Commands](#exercise-5-advanced-commands)
-   [Exercise 6: Editors and Shell
    scripts](#exercise-6-editors-and-shell-scripts)
-   [Exercise 7: Loops and Workflow
    Language](#exercise-7-loops-and-workflow-language)
-   [Exercise 8: Software Installation, Upkeep &
    More](#exercise-8-software-installation-upkeep--more)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Introduction

This markdown document contains of exercises for the introductory
workshop on command line use, entitled `Just Bash It`, developed and
hosted by Center for Health Data Science (HeaDS) at the Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences ([HeaDS](https://heads.ku.dk/)), in
collaboration with the University Library
([KUB](https://kub.kb.dk/datalab)) Data Lab.  
This one day workshop is targeted at biomedical and health researchers
at the University of Copenhagen with no prior experience in bash command
line use.

The workshop consists of a slideshow with slides to each section, in
addition to hands-on presentations (code-along) and accompanying
exercises.

## Exercise 1: Navigating Files and Directories

## Exercise 2: Project Organization

Let’s get structured!

1.  Set up a `projects` folder at the root/home/user on your computer
    with all the sub-folders shown on **slides 15**, in the slideshow.
    You are free to name the project within the `projects` folder
    whatever you would like,
    e.g. `Just_Bash_It, Intro_to_commandline, First_Project, etc`.
    **Cheat Sheet 1** in the slideshow will have the commands you need.

You should have downloaded the course materials including the raw data
files to you computer somewhere, maybe it is in your downloads folder or
maybe you moved it somewhere else.

2.  Using the commandline, navigate to where you downloaded the course
    materials and copy or move the files in the `data` directory to the
    correct sub-folder in you new project.

3.  Add a `readme` file to your project in which you write a couple of
    lines to yourself about what the content of this directory contains
    and its purpose.

## Exercise 3: Working with Files and Directories

## Exercise 4: Commands, Redirection & Pipes

## Exercise 5: Advanced Commands

## Exercise 6: Editors and Shell scripts

## Exercise 7: Loops and Workflow Language

## Exercise 8: Software Installation, Upkeep & More
