Just_Bash_It_Presentations.md, before:

![](BashFigure1.jpeg)
================
Center for Health Data Science, July 2022

- <a href="#introduction" id="toc-introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#presentation-1-navigating-files-and-directories"
  id="toc-presentation-1-navigating-files-and-directories">Presentation 1:
  Navigating Files and Directories</a>
- <a href="#presentation-2-project-organization"
  id="toc-presentation-2-project-organization">Presentation 2: Project
  Organization</a>
- <a href="#presentation-3-working-with-files-and-directories"
  id="toc-presentation-3-working-with-files-and-directories">Presentation
  3: Working with Files and Directories</a>
- <a href="#presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-wc-sed--cut"
  id="toc-presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-wc-sed--cut">Presentation
  4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: wc, sed &amp; cut</a>
- <a href="#presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-sort-grep--awk"
  id="toc-presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-sort-grep--awk">Presentation
  4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: sort, grep &amp; awk</a>
- <a href="#presentation-5-redirection--pipes"
  id="toc-presentation-5-redirection--pipes">Presentation 5: Redirection
  &amp; Pipes</a>
- <a href="#presentation-6-shell-scripts-and-loops"
  id="toc-presentation-6-shell-scripts-and-loops">Presentation 6: Shell
  Scripts and Loops</a>
- <a href="#presentation-7-software-installation-upkeep--more"
  id="toc-presentation-7-software-installation-upkeep--more">Presentation
  7: Software Installation, Upkeep &amp; More</a>
- <a href="#presentation-8-workflow-language--compute-power"
  id="toc-presentation-8-workflow-language--compute-power">Presentation 8:
  Workflow Language &amp; Compute Power</a>

## Introduction

This document contains the hands-on `presentations` for the introductory
workshop on command line use, entitled `Just Bash It`. It is meant to
aid workshop teachers to recall what to show course participants in the
code along session.  
Each section in the slides-show is followed by a **cheat sheet**
containing the commands used in each of the sections below. The **cheat
sheet** is intended for participants to look at and recall bash commands
used in a given session.

The `Just Bash It` workshop is developed and hosted by Center for Health
Data Science (HeaDS) at the Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
([HeaDS](https://heads.ku.dk/)), in collaboration with the University
Library ([KUB](https://kub.kb.dk/datalab)) Data Lab.

## Presentation 1: Navigating Files and Directories

In this section we introduce the directory tree and show how to move
around, list files and directories and what paths are.

Generally, whenever a command is written on a slide, you should
demonstrate it.

``` bash
pwd
```

``` bash

ls 

ls -F

ls -lht

ls *
```

``` bash

cd
```

``` bash

man ls

ls --help
```

## Presentation 2: Project Organization

In this section we show participants how to set up a good directory
structure. Workshop teachers should have setup a directory structure
like the one shown on slide 15.

1.  Under home/user/(Desktop \| Documents) show the directory `projects`
    which contains the project at hand. Reiterate commands `cd`, `pwd`
    and `ls`.

``` bash
cd
pwd
ls
```

2.  Move around the subdirectories in the directory `Just_Bash_It`. Make
    a folder which is missing, show `mkdir` and add a `readme` file to
    the dir using `touch`. Also make a mistake and reiterate `rm`.

``` bash
mkdir
touch
rm
```

3.  Go to the raw data folder and use `ls` and `du` options to show file
    sizes and file permission settings.

``` bash
ls -l *
ls -al *
ls -lh *

ls -l filename 
ls -al dir

du -sh
du -sh filename
du -sh dir
```

## Presentation 3: Working with Files and Directories

1.  View the content of a file with different commands. Use a readme
    file from a github repo as an example.

``` bash
cat patients.txt

less
head -n
tail -n
```

2.  Show how commands above can be used to copy content or part of it to
    a new file.

``` bash
head -10 patients.txt > patients_small.txt
```

3.  Show editors: `nano, vim and emacs`. Edit a `readme` file made under
    the project structure. Add a line of text with each editor and show
    and option or two. Save the changes quit and use less to view it.

4.  Show different command for compressing and decompressing a file,
    i.e:

``` bash
# zip 


gzip -k patients.txt
tar -cf patients.tar patients.txt
zip patients.zip patients.txt


# unzip
gunzip patients.txt
unzip patients.zip
zless patients.gz
```

## Presentation 4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: wc, sed & cut

1.  Show word count (`wc`), lines and characters:

``` bash
wc -l patients.txt
wc -c patients.txt
wc -w patients.txt
```

Why does `wc -l patients.txt` and `wc -w patients.txt` result in the
same output?

2.  Show some options for `cut`:

Cut bytes and characters

``` bash
cut -b 1,2,3,4 patients.txt
cut -b 1-4 patients.txt
cut -c 1-4 patients.txt
```

Cut field (f) with specified delimiter (d):

``` bash
cut -d ',' -f 1 patients.txt
cut -d ',' -f 3 patients.txt
cut -d ',' -f 2-3,5 patients.txt
```

3.  Show some options for `sed`:

Print lines 12,18 or print everything except lines 12,18:

``` bash
sed -n '12,18p' patients.txt
sed '12,18d' patients.txt
```

Search replace with `sed`:

``` bash
sed 's/herlev/Herlev/g' patients.txt
sed 's/A/X/g' patients.txt

# Only if nothing follows a, regex
sed's/a$/X/g' patients.txt

# Except in line 4
sed '4!s/A/C/g' patients.txt

# Only print lines containing Herlev
sed -n '/Herlev/p' patients.txt

# only replace A with C for lines containing Herlev
sed '/Herlev/s/A/C/g' patients.txt
```

## Presentation 4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: sort, grep & awk

4.  Show some options for `sort`:

``` bash
sort patients.txt

# Sort on field 4
sort -t ',' -k4 patients.txt

# Sort by field 2, than 3
sort -t ',' -k2,3 patients.txt

# Sort numerical 
sort -t ',' -n -k4 patients.txt
sort -t ',' -n -k2 patients.txt
```

5.  Show some options for `grep`

``` bash
# grep pattern, print the line,  i.e. all fields
grep 'Rigshospitalet' patients.txt
grep 'Rigs' patients.txt

# grep count
grep -c 'Rigs' patients.txt

# grep return pattern only
grep -o 'Rigs' patients.txt

# case sensitive
grep 'her' patients.txt
grep -i 'her' patients.txt


# regular expression
grep '40' patients.txt
grep '^40' patients.txt


# more complex regular expression
grep '[0-9]*,[0-9]*,5' patients.txt

# more complex regular expression
grep 'A,[A-Za-z]*,[0-9]*,[0-9]*,5' patients.txt
```

6.  Show some options for `awk`

``` bash
# awk pattern, print the line,  i.e. all fields
awk '/Rigs/ {print}' patients.txt
awk '/[0-9]*,[0-9]*,5/ {print}' patients.txt

# Print by field
awk '/Rigs/ {print}' patients.txt
awk -F ',' '{print $2,$3}' patients.txt

# Print by field more complex
awk -F ',' '/Rigs/ {print $2,$3}' patients.txt
# With delimiter
awk -F ',' '/Rigs/ {print $3 ";" $5}' patients.txt

# With delimiter for all columns
awk -F "," 'OFS=";" {print $3, $4, $2}' patients.txt

# Conditional statement with awk
awk  -F "," '{if ($4 >15) {print $4}}' patients.txt
awk  -F "," '{if ($4 >15) {print}}' patients.txt
```

## Presentation 5: Redirection & Pipes

1.  Chain the commands `sed` and `wc`. `sed` is used to remove the
    header line:

``` bash
sed '1d' patients.txt | wc -l
```

2.  Chain the commands `cut`, `sort` and `uniq` to obtain unique values
    from the hospital column.

``` bash
cut -d ',' -f 3 patients.txt | sort | uniq
```

Same command but remove the header row first with `sed`.

``` bash
sed '1d' patients.txt | cut -d ',' -f 3 | sort | uniq 
```

3.  Chain the commands `awk` and `sort`.

``` bash
awk -F ',' 'OFS="\t" {print $4, $2, $3}' patients.txt | sort  -k1n -k3
```

4.  Chain the commands `awk` and `cat` and show how the dash `-` is used
    to specify input file again.

``` bash
awk -F ',' '{print $5, $2, $3}' patients.txt | cat file1.txt -
awk -F ',' '{print $5, $2, $3}' patients.txt | cat - file1.txt
```

## Presentation 6: Shell Scripts and Loops

## Presentation 7: Software Installation, Upkeep & More

NO PRESENTATION

## Presentation 8: Workflow Language & Compute Power

1.  In the script you have made during presentation 6 or a new one,
    write a bash loop. Print something like the file name in each
    iteration of the loop so you can demonstrate that it works when you
    run it. Perhaps we can run the loop on the RNAseq data. I guess one
    thing we could do in the loop would be to run `gunzip -c` and stream
    the first 12 lines to the display to check that they are all okay
    fastq files.

Commit message:

part 8 removed from exercises and slideshow update

Just_Bash_It_Presentations.md, after:

![](BashFigure1.jpeg)
================
Center for Health Data Science, July 2022

- <a href="#introduction" id="toc-introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#presentation-1-navigating-files-and-directories"
  id="toc-presentation-1-navigating-files-and-directories">Presentation 1:
  Navigating Files and Directories</a>
- <a href="#presentation-2-project-organization"
  id="toc-presentation-2-project-organization">Presentation 2: Project
  Organization</a>
- <a href="#presentation-3-working-with-files-and-directories"
  id="toc-presentation-3-working-with-files-and-directories">Presentation
  3: Working with Files and Directories</a>
- <a href="#presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-wc-sed--cut"
  id="toc-presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-wc-sed--cut">Presentation
  4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: wc, sed &amp; cut</a>
- <a href="#presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-sort-grep--awk"
  id="toc-presentation-4-more-bash-commands---part-1-sort-grep--awk">Presentation
  4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: sort, grep &amp; awk</a>
- <a href="#presentation-5-redirection--pipes"
  id="toc-presentation-5-redirection--pipes">Presentation 5: Redirection
  &amp; Pipes</a>
- <a href="#presentation-6-shell-scripts-and-loops"
  id="toc-presentation-6-shell-scripts-and-loops">Presentation 6: Shell
  Scripts and Loops</a>
- <a href="#presentation-7-software-installation-upkeep--more"
  id="toc-presentation-7-software-installation-upkeep--more">Presentation
  7: Software Installation, Upkeep &amp; More</a>

## Introduction

This document contains the hands-on `presentations` for the introductory
workshop on command line use, entitled `Just Bash It`. It is meant to
aid workshop teachers to recall what to show course participants in the
code along session.  
Each section in the slides-show is followed by a **cheat sheet**
containing the commands used in each of the sections below. The **cheat
sheet** is intended for participants to look at and recall bash commands
used in a given session.

The `Just Bash It` workshop is developed and hosted by Center for Health
Data Science (HeaDS) at the Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
([HeaDS](https://heads.ku.dk/)), in collaboration with the University
Library ([KUB](https://kub.kb.dk/datalab)) Data Lab.

## Presentation 1: Navigating Files and Directories

In this section we introduce the directory tree and show how to move
around, list files and directories and what paths are.

Generally, whenever a command is written on a slide, you should
demonstrate it.

``` bash
pwd
```

``` bash

ls 

ls -F

ls -lht

ls *
```

``` bash

cd
```

``` bash

man ls

ls --help
```

## Presentation 2: Project Organization

In this section we show participants how to set up a good directory
structure. Workshop teachers should have setup a directory structure
like the one shown on slide 15.

1.  Under home/user/(Desktop \| Documents) show the directory `projects`
    which contains the project at hand. Reiterate commands `cd`, `pwd`
    and `ls`.

``` bash
cd
pwd
ls
```

2.  Move around the subdirectories in the directory `Just_Bash_It`. Make
    a folder which is missing, show `mkdir` and add a `readme` file to
    the dir using `touch`. Also make a mistake and reiterate `rm`.

``` bash
mkdir
touch
rm
```

3.  Go to the raw data folder and use `ls` and `du` options to show file
    sizes and file permission settings.

``` bash
ls -l *
ls -al *
ls -lh *

ls -l filename 
ls -al dir

du -sh
du -sh filename
du -sh dir
```

## Presentation 3: Working with Files and Directories

1.  View the content of a file with different commands. Use a readme
    file from a github repo as an example.

``` bash
cat patients.txt

less
head -n
tail -n
```

2.  Show how commands above can be used to copy content or part of it to
    a new file.

``` bash
head -10 patients.txt > patients_small.txt
```

3.  Show editors: `nano, vim and emacs`. Edit a `readme` file made under
    the project structure. Add a line of text with each editor and show
    and option or two. Save the changes quit and use less to view it.

4.  Show different command for compressing and decompressing a file,
    i.e:

``` bash
# zip 


gzip -k patients.txt
tar -cf patients.tar patients.txt
zip patients.zip patients.txt


# unzip
gunzip patients.txt
unzip patients.zip
zless patients.gz
```

## Presentation 4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: wc, sed & cut

1.  Show word count (`wc`), lines and characters:

``` bash
wc -l patients.txt
wc -c patients.txt
wc -w patients.txt
```

Why does `wc -l patients.txt` and `wc -w patients.txt` result in the
same output?

2.  Show some options for `cut`:

Cut bytes and characters

``` bash
cut -b 1,2,3,4 patients.txt
cut -b 1-4 patients.txt
cut -c 1-4 patients.txt
```

Cut field (f) with specified delimiter (d):

``` bash
cut -d ',' -f 1 patients.txt
cut -d ',' -f 3 patients.txt
cut -d ',' -f 2-3,5 patients.txt
```

3.  Show some options for `sed`:

Print lines 12,18 or print everything except lines 12,18:

``` bash
sed -n '12,18p' patients.txt
sed '12,18d' patients.txt
```

Search replace with `sed`:

``` bash
sed 's/herlev/Herlev/g' patients.txt
sed 's/A/X/g' patients.txt

# Only if nothing follows a, regex
sed's/a$/X/g' patients.txt

# Except in line 4
sed '4!s/A/C/g' patients.txt

# Only print lines containing Herlev
sed -n '/Herlev/p' patients.txt

# only replace A with C for lines containing Herlev
sed '/Herlev/s/A/C/g' patients.txt
```

## Presentation 4: More Bash Commands - Part 1: sort, grep & awk

4.  Show some options for `sort`:

``` bash
sort patients.txt

# Sort on field 4
sort -t ',' -k4 patients.txt

# Sort by field 2, than 3
sort -t ',' -k2,3 patients.txt

# Sort numerical 
sort -t ',' -n -k4 patients.txt
sort -t ',' -n -k2 patients.txt
```

5.  Show some options for `grep`

``` bash
# grep pattern, print the line,  i.e. all fields
grep 'Rigshospitalet' patients.txt
grep 'Rigs' patients.txt

# grep count
grep -c 'Rigs' patients.txt

# grep return pattern only
grep -o 'Rigs' patients.txt

# case sensitive
grep 'her' patients.txt
grep -i 'her' patients.txt


# regular expression
grep '40' patients.txt
grep '^40' patients.txt


# more complex regular expression
grep '[0-9]*,[0-9]*,5' patients.txt

# more complex regular expression
grep 'A,[A-Za-z]*,[0-9]*,[0-9]*,5' patients.txt
```

6.  Show some options for `awk`

``` bash
# awk pattern, print the line,  i.e. all fields
awk '/Rigs/ {print}' patients.txt
awk '/[0-9]*,[0-9]*,5/ {print}' patients.txt

# Print by field
awk '/Rigs/ {print}' patients.txt
awk -F ',' '{print $2,$3}' patients.txt

# Print by field more complex
awk -F ',' '/Rigs/ {print $2,$3}' patients.txt
# With delimiter
awk -F ',' '/Rigs/ {print $3 ";" $5}' patients.txt

# With delimiter for all columns
awk -F "," 'OFS=";" {print $3, $4, $2}' patients.txt

# Conditional statement with awk
awk  -F "," '{if ($4 >15) {print $4}}' patients.txt
awk  -F "," '{if ($4 >15) {print}}' patients.txt
```

## Presentation 5: Redirection & Pipes

1.  Chain the commands `sed` and `wc`. `sed` is used to remove the
    header line:

``` bash
sed '1d' patients.txt | wc -l
```

2.  Chain the commands `cut`, `sort` and `uniq` to obtain unique values
    from the hospital column.

``` bash
cut -d ',' -f 3 patients.txt | sort | uniq
```

Same command but remove the header row first with `sed`.

``` bash
sed '1d' patients.txt | cut -d ',' -f 3 | sort | uniq 
```

3.  Chain the commands `awk` and `sort`.

``` bash
awk -F ',' 'OFS="\t" {print $4, $2, $3}' patients.txt | sort  -k1n -k3
```

4.  Chain the commands `awk` and `cat` and show how the dash `-` is used
    to specify input file again.

``` bash
awk -F ',' '{print $5, $2, $3}' patients.txt | cat file1.txt -
awk -F ',' '{print $5, $2, $3}' patients.txt | cat - file1.txt
```

## Presentation 6: Shell Scripts and Loops

## Presentation 7: Software Installation, Upkeep & More

1.  Show how to use either `brew` or `apt-get` to update a software,
    could be python or similar. N.B something that does not take
    forever.

2.  Use open to open a file (docx or similar) and an application
    (Browser)

3.  Show hidden configuration files, both those which should not /
    cannot be edited without sudo rights and those which are local and
    can be edited.

4.  Change the command line prompt by editing the approprite
    configuration file (either the .bashrc or the .zshrc).
